Passive sync spec (#113)
aranya-project/aranya-docs: docs/bidi-sync.md

        self
    }
}
```

#### Default Values

- `bidirectional` defaults to `false` to maintain backward compatibility
- Existing configurations continue to work unchanged

## Backward Compatibility

The implementation maintains full backward compatibility:

1. Existing `SyncPeerConfig` without the `bidirectional` field defaults to unidirectional sync
2. Servers automatically detect bidirectional requests via the `SyncType::Poll.bidirectional` flag
3. The `sync_now` API signature remains unchanged
4. Existing error types and handling remain compatible

## Security Considerations

Bidirectional sync does not introduce new security vulnerabilities:

1. Both directions use the same PSK-secured QUIC connection
2. Each direction follows the existing sync protocol with proper authentication
3. Server-initiated sync requests follow the same validation as client-initiated requests

## Testing

New test cases should cover:

1. **Basic Bidirectional Flow**: Verify both directions complete successfully
2. **Backward Compatibility**: Ensure unidirectional sync continues to work unchanged
3. **Configuration**: Test all combinations of `bidirectional` flag settings

## Future Considerations

> 

Reviewer: Future considerations are keeping the stream/connection open and doing syncs on an interval. it may affect how we implement this issue.

---
title: Bidirectional Sync
taxonomy:
    category: docs
---

# Bidirectional Sync

## Overview

Bidirectional sync allows two Aranya peers to synchronize with each other in both directions using a single QUIC stream connection. This is particularly useful in scenarios where network connections may be asymmetric - where one peer can easily initiate connections to another, but the reverse direction is difficult or impossible.

> In traditional unidirectional sync, Peer A connects to Peer B, sends a sync request, receives a sync response, and closes the connection. If Peer B also needs to sync with Peer A, it must initiate a separate connection. With bidirectional sync, after Peer A receives Peer B's sync response, Peer B can immediately send its own sync request over the same stream, allowing both peers to synchronize in a single connection.

Reviewer 2: The QUIC syncer uses streams for sync requests. So each sync request doesn't need to be a separate connection.
```suggestion
In traditional unidirectional sync, Peer A connects to Peer B, sends a sync request, receives a sync response, and closes the corresponding QUIC stream. A traditional unidirectional sync is a 2-way handshake. If Peer B also needs to sync with Peer A, it must initiate a separate sync request handshake in the other direction. With bidirectional sync, after Peer A receives Peer B's sync response, Peer B can immediately send its own sync request over the same stream, then Peer A responds with a sync response to PeerB, allowing both peers to synchronize in a single 3-way handshake.
```

Author: What's a 3-way handshake?

Reviewer 2: 3-way handshake because the bidirectional sync protocol completes after 3 phases: A -> B, A <- B, A -> B.
TCP connection is an example of a 3-way handshake.

Reviewer: I am also not sure that the QUIC protocol implementation details belong here, this is more about the sync protocol.

## Design

### Protocol Extension

The existing `SyncType::Poll` variant is extended to include a bidirectional flag:

```rust
pub enum SyncType {
    Poll {
        request: SyncRequestMessage,
        address: ServerAddress,
        // NEW: Indicates whether this is a bidirectional sync request

>         bidirectional: bool,

Reviewer 2: Can this new `bidirectional` field be added to `SyncRequestMessage` instead so when the server receives the sync request it can parse `SyncRequestMessage` to determine whether to make a sync request in the other direction?

Author: Why is that better? The server will still receive it if it's here.

Reviewer 2: It depends on if we want bidirectional sync to be supported by the sync protocol in `aranya-core` or only by our specific implementation of the sync protocol in `aranya`.

    },
    // ... other variants remain unchanged
}
```

### Message Flow

#### Unidirectional Sync (Current Behavior)
```
Client                    Server
  |                         |
  |--- SyncRequest -------->|
  |    (bidirectional=false)|
  |                         |
  |<--- SyncResponse -------|
  |                         |
 [Stream Closed]
```

#### Bidirectional Sync (New Behavior)
```
Client                    Server
  |                         |
  |--- SyncRequest -------->|
  |    (bidirectional=true) |
  |                         |
  |<--- SyncResponse -------|
  |                         |
  |<--- SyncRequest --------|

>   |    (from server)        |

Reviewer: This is a good fallback for a quick implementation. Ideally, I think we would like to try and reduce the amount of redundant data. If bidirectional=true, we can probably just expect the client to immediately send a sync response. I think there are a lot more details though around actually calculating what commands we would need to send.

- `sync_now`: Performs bidirectional sync immediately
- `add_sync_peer`: Configures the peer for bidirectional sync on all periodic sync operations

If `cfg` is `None` for `sync_now`, unidirectional sync is performed (maintaining backward compatibility).

### Error Handling

Bidirectional sync introduces new error scenarios:

1. **Partial Failure**: The initial sync response succeeds, but the server's subsequent sync request fails.
2. **Response Failure**: The server's sync request succeeds, but the client's response to that request fails.

A new error type is introduced:

```rust
#[derive(Error, Debug)]
pub enum BidirectionalSyncError {
    #[error("Server sync request failed after successful sync response: {0}")]
    ServerRequestFailed(Box<SyncError>),
    #[error("Client response to server request failed: {0}")]
    ClientResponseFailed(Box<SyncError>),
}
```

These errors are wrapped in the existing `SyncError::Other` variant to maintain compatibility with current error handling.

## Implementation

### Client Side Changes

#### QUIC State Implementation

The `sync_impl` method in the QUIC `State` is modified to handle bidirectional sync:

```rust

> async fn sync_impl<S>(
>     syncer: &mut Syncer<Self>,
>     id: GraphId,
>     sink: &mut S,
>     peer: &Addr,
> ) -> impl Future<Output = SyncResult<()>> + Send

Reviewer 2: `SyncPeerConfig` isn't used directly in `task.rs`. There is a delay queue that stores a `SyncPeer` type which can have a `bidirectional: bool` field added to it. The `bidirectional` bool can be taken in as a function parameter here:
```suggestion
async fn sync_impl<S>(
    syncer: &mut Syncer<Self>,
    id: GraphId,
    sink: &mut S,
    peer: &Addr,
    bidirectional: bool,
) -> impl Future<Output = SyncResult<()>> + Send
```
Then `sync_impl()` can be called from `sync()` like this:
`if let Err(e) = <ST as SyncState>::sync_impl(self, peer.graph_id, &mut sink, &peer.addr, &peer.bidirectional)`

where
    S: Sink<<crate::EN as Engine>::Effect> + Send,
{
    async move {
        syncer.state.store.set_team(id.into_id().into());

        let stream = syncer.connect(peer).await?;
        let (mut recv, mut send) = stream.split();

        let server_addr = ();
        let mut sync_requester = SyncRequester::new(id, &mut Rng, server_addr);

        // Determine if this should be a bidirectional sync
        let bidirectional = /* check SyncPeerConfig */;

        // Send initial sync request
        syncer.send_sync_request(&mut send, &mut sync_requester, peer, bidirectional).await?;

        // Receive sync response  
        syncer.receive_sync_response(&mut recv, &mut sync_requester, &id, sink, peer).await?;

        // If bidirectional, handle server's sync request
        if bidirectional {
            syncer.handle_server_sync_request(&mut recv, &mut send, &id, sink, peer).await?;

>         }

Reviewer 2: It seems more clear to show the request and response explicitly at the protocol level rather than hiding both operations inside a single handler method.

        _ => false,
    };

    // Generate and send sync response
    let response_data = Self::sync_respond(client.clone(), &recv_buf, active_team).await?;
    let resp = SyncResponse::Ok(response_data);
    let data = postcard::to_allocvec(&resp)?;
    send.send(Bytes::from(data)).await?;

    // If bidirectional, send our own sync request
    if bidirectional {
        let our_request_data = Self::generate_sync_request(client.clone(), active_team).await?;
        send.send(Bytes::from(our_request_data)).await?;

        // Read client's response to our request
        let mut response_buf = Vec::new();
        recv.read_to_end(&mut response_buf).await?;
        Self::process_sync_response(client, &response_buf, active_team).await?;
    }

    send.close().await?;
    Ok(())
}
```

### Configuration Changes

#### SyncPeerConfig Builder

```rust
impl SyncPeerConfigBuilder {
    pub fn bidirectional(&mut self, bidirectional: bool) -> &mut Self {
        self.bidirectional = bidirectional;
        self
    }
}
```

#### Default Values

- `bidirectional` defaults to `false` to maintain backward compatibility
- Existing configurations continue to work unchanged

> ## Backward Compatibility

Reviewer 3: Do we even have a version a bump. The current quic syncer is using [this](https://github.com/aranya-project/aranya/blob/d74f88812f9183cf844665528da926ce0f526d20/crates/aranya-daemon/src/sync/task/quic.rs#L66-L67) for the APLN

> ## Backward Compatibility

Reviewer 2: If we want to maintain backward compatibility with `quic-sync-unstable`, I think we'd want to fallback to unidirectional sync if that version is observed. But, my understanding is that if the ALPN protocols don't match, the QUIC connection cannot be established. This means if we don't change the `quic-sync-unstable` ALPN version when adding bidirectional sync, incompatible versions of the syncer could be used together. If we do bump the ALPN version, old/new syncers could no longer communicate with each other even though the change to support uni/bidi sync in a backward compatible way is trivial.
I think we may have made a mistake by removing the version byte from the sync protocol since we no longer have a way to bump the protocol and syncer versions independently.

> ## Backward Compatibility

Reviewer 2: Having a single protocol version means that there's no way to bump the protocol version in a backward compatible way. Even if we implemented the protocol in a backward compatible way, bumping the protocol version would mean newer protocol version can no longer communicate with older versions.
Agree that supporting backward compatibility between 1.0 and 2.0 isn't needed right now because we're already planning to make a breaking changes with the PSK -> cert change.
But we will need to be able to make backward compatible changes to 2.0+ if 2.0 is committing to API stability.

> ## Backward Compatibility

Author: By backwards compatible I just mean that you won't have to change code that calls sync. Yes both peers will need to run the new version to enable bidi sync.
